# 4 January 2018

## Linux Command Line: Regular Expressions

Regular expressions are symbolic notations to identify patterns in text.

The POSIX standard regex is the most common set of symbols. There are other 
regex specifications that provide more.

### grep

`grep` (global regular expression print)

`grep -i`: ignore case

`grep -v`: invert match. prints every line that doesn't match pattern.

`grep -c, --count`: print the number of matches.

`grep -l`: print the name of each matching file instead of the line

`grep -L`: print only the names of files that do not contain matches.

`grep -n, --line-number`: print each matching line with the number of the 
line within the file.

### POSIX character classes

- `[:alnum:]`: alphanumeric characters; equivalent to `[A-Za-z0-9]`.
- `[:word:]`: adds `_` to the `[:alnum:]` set.
- `[:alpha:]`: alphabetic characters, uppercase and lowercase.
- `[:blank:]`: includes space and tab characters
- `[:cntrl:]`: ASCII-control codes
- `[:digit:]`: Numerals 0 through 9
- `[:graph:]`: Visible characters

#### Symbols and Metacharacters

**Basic Regular Expression (BRE)**

- `.`: any one character
- `^`: match at the beginning of the line
- `$`: match at the end of the line
- `[ ]`: match a set of characters. `[ab]` matches if string contains `a` or `b`.
- `[^ ]`: match if string does not contain any characters from the set.
- `[A-Z]`: `-` defines a range of characters. 
- `[A-Za-z0-9]`: multiple ranges
- `[-a-z]`: include the `-` character in the set by listing it first.
- `\( \)`: Must be escaped for BRE.
- `\{ \}`: Must be escaped for BRE.

#### Extended Regular Expression (ERE)

Requires `egrep` or `grep -E`.

- `|`: alternation operator. logical OR. matches against a set of expressions:
`'AAA|BBB|CCC'`.
- `( )`: groups metacharacters into a single symbol: `^(aa|bb|cc)`.
- `?`: zero or one time
- `*`: zero or more times
- `+`: one or more times
- `{n}`: exact number of matches
- `{n,}`: minimum number of matches
- `{,m}`: maximum number of matches
- `{n,m}`: minimum and maximum number of matches

#### Examples

```bash
# find a five-letter word where the third letter is 'j' and the last letter is 'r'
cat /usr/share/dict/american-english | grep '^..j.r$'
# Major
# major
```

```bash
# match a valid sentence
grep -E '[[:upper:]][[:upper:][:lower:] ]*\.'
```

```bash
^([[:alpha:]]+ ?)+$
```
One more alphabetic characters followed by zero or more spaces.
