# 16 October 2017


## How to teach technical concepts with cartoons

[Article by Julia Evans](https://jvns.ca/teach-tech-with-cartoons/)

- use few words
- break the subject into simple components
- show relevant scenarios (i.e., the real world application of the subject)

## Functional techniques and readability

I'm finding that using `compose` sometimes leads to simpler code and sometimes
does not. Especially for people other than me, being able to see the inputs
to functions explicitly in the code makes the code easier to understand. 

One example of this is `Promise.prototype.then` callbacks in async actions.

**Example**

More readable (in my opinion):

```javascript
.then((foo) => dispatch(updateFooSuccess(foo.id, foo)))
```

Less readable (in my opinion):

```javascript
.then(R.compose(dispatch, R.partial(updateFooSuccess, [foo.id])))
```

## Lack of code patterns 

I'm frustrated that I don't really have a pattern for things I've done multiple
  times while building a React/Redux application.

These things include:

- Fetching a collection from an API. 
- Fetching an item from an API.
- Dynamically building a form.
- Storing and updating form data.
- Architecting the application routes.

It feels like I should have more consistent and clear ways of doing these things.
Instead, it feels like I'm reinventing the wheel each time I build something.


## "Promises aren't cancelable"

I have a sense that a lot of people are concerned about the non-cancelability
of promises. I feel like I've seen a lot of comments about this issue. Having read
a few blog posts about modeling cancelable operations several months ago, it could 
be just confirmation bias. The broad outline of this type of comment is that
someone says that they find promises nicer than callbacks and then someone else
responds that promises aren't the final solution to modeling asynchronous
operations in JavaScript because promises aren't cancelable.

If this isn't just an inaccurate perception of mine based on confirmation bias,
then it seems to me that a lot of people want to be able to cancel their asynchronous
operations. This sticks out to me in part because I've never had an operation
that wasn't an infinite loop that could run long enough that it would be  worth 
canceling. There are real, legitimate occasions to cancel a long-running operation.
But I'm surprised by the number of people for whom this seems to be a big problem 
with promises. Am I missing something? Do all of these people have an actual 
need to cancel their promises? 

I wonder if the frequency of this complaint has more to do with the fact that a 
few smart people have noted this problem with promises. And people who listen to 
those smart people, knowing them to be smart, are repeating what they've said. 
It's not that the lack of cancelability is causing as many problems as there are 
complaints. The complaint could be an expression of more fundamental doubt or 
distrust in the design of the JavaScript language.

JavaScript has many idiosyncratic features and behaviors. These are
widely regarded to be flaws in the language's design because of the large quantity 
of bugs caused by these idiosyncracies. Despite their best intentions, many developers have been
bitten by the language. So if those people hear that there's a problem with 
something in the language, past experience leads them to believe that this will 
probably be a real and serious problem _for them_ at some point, unless they avoid it. 
The criticism of promises for lacking cancelability, without needing that cancelability, 
could function as a reminder not to fall into another trap.

Certainly, if you need to cancel a promisified long-running operation, then you 
need an alternative way to model that operation. And alternatives exist. 
Tasks are one example. But the essential difference between a Promise and a Task 
isn't cancelability itself. The essential difference between a Promise and a Task 
is eager versus lazy evaluation. Promises are eagerly evaluated and Tasks are 
lazily evaluated. It's the lazy evaluation that makes a Task cancelable.
