# 23 November 2017


## Advanced Types in Elm - Phantom Types

> A "phantom type" is a parameterized type where one or more of the parameters
do not appear on the right hand side.

```
type Foo a =
  Bar String
  Baz
```

Phantom types help to restrict function arguments.

Phantom types are used to create guarantees at compile time.

**Further reading**

- [Advanced Types in Elm - Phantom Types](https://medium.com/@ckoster22/advanced-types-in-elm-phantom-types-808044c5946d)
- [Haskell docs: Phantom Types](https://wiki.haskell.org/Phantom_type)


## Fuzzy thinking notes

I was recently exploring two things that I thought were unrelated: formal
grammars and "fuzz" (or "property") testing.
At some point, I started to feel like my newfound understanding of formal grammar 
was helping me to write fuzz testers.
I want to describe that connection here because it seems to me that knowing
a little about both subjects made them each a little easier to understand 
in isolation.
(I'm also writing this because it's fun to play around with the possible connections 
between seemingly unrelated things, whether or not the connection really exists.)

Let's say we have a function `hexToRgb` that converts a hex color value to an
rgb value. 
We don't need to know about the implementation of `hexToRgb`.
We're only interested in the type signature:

```elm
hexToRgb : String -> Result String (Int, Int, Int)
```

`hexToRgb` takes a string (the hex color value) and returns a `Result` with
a string describing an error or a tuple representing an RGB value.

We're not worried about implementing this function but we are worried
about testing it.
We've taken a solid first step by testing that `hexToRgb` converts
`"#ffffff"` to `Ok (255, 255, 255)`.
The test passes but we don't feel like we're finished yet.
How do we know that `hexToRgb` can handle _any_ valid hex color when we've only
tested it on one?
Maybe there's an edge case our implementation doesn't account for.
Maybe `hexToRgb` returns an `Err` for any hex color that isn't `#ffffff`.
We don't know until we write more tests.

But how do we write tests that account for "kinds" of input like hex colors 
rather than specific values like `"#ffffff"`?
We could simply generate all the valid hex color strings and write a test
that calls `hexToRgb` on all of them. 
But there are a lot of hex colors. 
In fact, there are [`16,777,216 + 4,096`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_colors) 
of them.

Instead, we decide to take this idea and scale it down. 
Instead of generating millions of hex colors, we generate 75 or a 100. 
And we generate these hex colors randomly each time the test runs. 
It doesn't matter that the hex colors are different each time the test runs
because we're not testing the conversion itself.
We just want to test that nothing unexpected happens when we call `hexToRgb`
with a valid hex color.

This method of testing is called property testing or "fuzz" testing. 
Fuzz testing requires us to think more generally about our inputs.
Instead of defining specific inputs like `#ffffff`, we define something
that generates a kind of value, in this case, a valid hex color.

The `Fuzz` module gives us a set of primitive fuzzers and some helper functions
that can be used to compose fuzzers to create new fuzzers.
So we've got a fuzzer that generates a random `Bool`, or `Int`, or `String`, etc.
None of these are what we want. 
They're too generic.
We're going to have to build our own hex color fuzzer.
We do that by writing smaller fuzzers and composing them.
So we need to break "valid hex color" into smaller parts that can be represented
by the tools we have.
Later, we'll connect these parts into a bigger "valid hex color" fuzzer.

We can identify these little building blocks by describing a valid hex color.
How do we describe a valid hex color? 
We can start by listing all the characteristics of a valid hex color in plain English
(or German or Esperanto or Morse code).
A hex color is:

- A string.
- The first character is always `'#'`.
- Every character after the first is a valid hexadecimal digit:
  - numbers 0 to 9.
  - letters A to F.
  - alphabetic characters can be upper or lowercase.
- The hexadecimal is three digits or six digits.

This wasn't too hard to describe. 
But the problem with using natural language is that its meaning can be ambiguous. 
For example, I forgot to mention in the list above that a hexadecimal number 
does not include any whitespace. 
Maybe you knew about the whitespace too. 
Maybe everyone knows about the whitespace. 
Or maybe I am the only one who knows about the whitespace.
So I add another item to the list that says "No whitespace".
But now I have to define what I mean by whitespace.
So the list gets longer and the requirements become more verbose, and 
misintepretation becomes more likely.
We find ourselves reaching for a language with less ambiguity, less possible
meanings, and less words required to say what we mean.

This is where a formal grammar becomes useful.
At this point it feels like we are very far away from our original task,
which was to generate some random valid hex values.
We don't really need a formal grammar for that, do we?
We can get the job done without it.
That's absolutely true.
It's a worthwhile excersise because it will give us an intuition for how to 
structure our fuzzers.

but the problem with 

of testing specific values like `"#ffffff"`, we test "kinds" of values


in terms of "kinds" of values rather than
any specific value.
and it
requires us to think in terms of "kinds" of values like "hex


we just want to test that `hexToRgb` always returns an `Ok (Int, Int, Int)`.
We're not testing the conversion itself.
We just
 
Our intent is to 
As long as the hex color is valid, `hexToRgb` 

Instead of generating all valid hex colors, we generate a reasonably large number of hex colors randomly.


For example, we could test that `hexToRgb "#ffffff" == Ok (255, 255, 255)`.
But we want to be reasonably sure that this function can handle _any_ valid hex color value,
not just `"#ffffff"`. 
Maybe there's an edge case our implementation didn't account for.
Or `hexToRgb` returns an `Err` for any hex color that isn't `"#ffffff"`.
We don't know until we've tested and we can't be 100% certain our function
works until we test all hex colors.
The problem is that there are a lot of hex colors. 
In fact, there are [`16,777,216 + 4,096`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_colors) 
of them.
We could take the time to generate all of these values with their
corresponding RGB values and test `hexToRgb` on each of them.
Or we could write a test that involves generating a series of random valid hex
colors and testing that `hexToRgb` returns an `Ok` for each.
We won't have the complete certainty that `hexToRgb` works on all valid hex colors
and we won't be testing that the conversions themselves are correct.
But we will have a reasonable level of certainty that nothing unexpected (e.g., `Err`)
happens when we give `hexToRgb` random input.
That kind of testing is called property testing or fuzz testing, as it has been
named by the package `elm-community/elm-test`.
