# 4 November 2017

## The Melting Pot of JavaScript

[_The Melting Pot of JavaScript_](https://increment.com/development/the-melting-pot-of-javascript/)

> ...the JavaScript ecosystem closely reflects human culture. It is inventive, incremental, messy, assimilating everything on its way, and ubiquitous.

> There was usually one preferred way to talk to a database, one way to draw the UI, one way to use the network. You could step outside the paved path if you wanted to, but it was cold and lonely there. This brought stability but stifled innovation.

> Configuration should not stand in the way of getting started
>
> A tool should work with (almost) no configuration.


## the-super-tiny-compiler

Three phases of compiling

- Parsing: input a string of code and output an structured representation of 
  that string.
- Transformation: manipulate the structured representation.
- Code Generation: translate the structured representation of the string to the
  target code.

### Parsing

Two phases:

#### Lexical analysis

During lexical analysis, a string of source code is mapped to a list of tokens.

The module responsible for this mapping is called a lexer or a tokenizer.

Tokens represent bits of syntax: numbers, keywords, punctuation, etc.

**Source code**

```
(add 2 4)
```

**Tokens**

```javascript
[
  { type: 'paren', value: '(', },
  { type: 'name', value: 'add', },
  { type: 'number', value: '2', },
  { type: 'number', value: '4', },
  { type: 'paren', value: ')', },
]
```

#### Syntactic analysis

Syntactic analysis processes the list of tokens into an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST).

An AST represents the relationships between tokens.

**Abstract Syntax Tree**

```javascript
{
  type: 'Program',
  body: [{
    type: 'CallExpression', 
    name: 'add',
    params: [
      {
        type: 'NumberLiteral',
        value: '2',
      }, 
      {
        type: 'NumberLiteral',
        value: '4',
      }
    ]
  }]
}
```

Each of the values on this tree with a `type` property are called AST Nodes.

### Transforming

The Transformation stage of compilation manipulates the AST nodes.

Transforming the AST is done via a depth-first traversal of the tree.

#### Visitors

During the depth-first traversal of the AST, each node is "visited". 
During traversal, a visitor method is called on that node. 
The method corresponds to the node's type. 
Each visitor method takes a reference to the node and a reference to the node's parent.

There are two events when a visitor node is called: "enter" and "exit".

As you traverse down the tree, you call the enter method for each node.

As you traverse up the tree, you call the exit method for each node.

```
const visitor = {
  NumberLiteral : {
    enter: (node, parent) { /* ... */ }, 
    exit: (node, parent) { /* ... */ },
  }
  CallExpression {
    enter: (node, parent) { /* ... */ }, 
    exit: (node, parent) { /* ... */ },
  }
};
```

### Code generation

During the code generation phase, the compiler maps the AST to a string of bytecode.

The code generator knows how to "print" the target code for each node type.

## elum-the-super-tiny-compiler

### Ports

A port from Elm to Javascript takes some kind of Elm value and returns a command:

```elm
port module Ports exposing (..)


port msgForJs : a -> Cmd b
```

```javascript
// initializes a headless app
const app = Elm.Foo.worker();

app.ports.msgForJs.subscribe((msg) => {
  console.log(`Message for JavaScript: ${msg}`);
});
```

A port from JavaScript to Elm takes a decoder and returns a subscription.

```elm
port module Ports exposing (..)

import Json.Encode

port msgForElm : (Json.Encode.Value -> a) -> Sub a
```

```javascript
app.ports.msgForElm.send(`Message for Elm.`)
```

## `Platform.Sub`


The "tagger" is the union type constructor. So `Json.Encode.Value -> a`, where
`a` is anything. `Json.Encode.Value -> Msg` is a member of the `Msg` union type.

To run a command, 0
So the update function returns a `(model, Cmd Msg)`.


```
update : Msg -> Model -> (Model, Cmd Msg)

type InfoForOutside 
  = CreateEntry
  | ModifyEntry Entry
  | DeleteEntry Int
  | LogError String

sendInfoOutside : InfoForOutside -> Cmd msg

port infoForOutside : GenericOutsideData -> Cmd msg
```


**Questions**

_What happens when a port receives a message from JavaScript?_

**Documentation**

- [Docs: JavaScript Interop](http://elm-lang.org/docs/syntax#javascript-interop)
  No explicit explanation of what happens to the JavaScript value sent through an 
  Elm port. The code example implies that the JavaScript value is automagically
  decoded to an Elm value.
- [Elm Guide: JavaScript Interop - Ports](https://guide.elm-lang.org/interop/javascript.html#ports)
  Again, no explicit explanation. The code example implies automagic behavior.
- [Elm Guide: JavaScript Interop - Customs and Border Protection](https://guide.elm-lang.org/interop/javascript.html#customs-and-border-protection)
  Poorly explains that JavaScript values are coerced to Elm values: 
  "...incoming ports can handle all the following Elm types".
  Provides a list of JavaScript-to-Elm equivalences. Seems to attempt to convert
  a JavaScript value to an Elm value based on the type signature of the port:
  `port foo : (List String -> a) -> Sub a` indicates to Elm that the JavaScript
  value should be a JavaScript array of JavaScript strings.
  Elm throws an error if this is not the case.

_Is the value sent from JavaScript to Elm automatically decoded? And if it is
automatically decoded, why do I have to decode parts of it?_

I had this type:

```elm
type alias OutsideInfo =
  { tag : String,
  , payload : Json.Encode.Value
  }
```
I have to manually decode the part of the port message that I specified as 
`Json.Encode.Value`. That's because the type alias doesn't give Elm information
about what specific type it is. Without that info, Elm is unable to coerce the
JavaScript value to an Elm value.

_Is there a way to have an empty model?_

Use an empty tuple: `type alias Model = ()`.
