# 23 October 2017

## elm-guide random gif example

New concepts:

- A new type of command: `Cmd` returned by `Http.send`.
- JSON decoding: `Json.Decode.at` and `Json.Decode.string`.
- `Result` union type.

### elm-lang/http

#### Http.get

Type:

```elm
get : String -> Decoder a -> Request a
```

Takes two arguments: a request url and a response decoder, and returns
a `Request`. `a` is the response body.

A `Request` describes an Http request.

Example:

```elm
Http.get "https://foo.com" (Decode.at [ "data", "image_url" ] Decode.string)
```

#### Http.send

Type:

```elm
send : (Result Error a -> msg) -> Request a -> Cmd msg
```

`NewGif (Result Http.Error String)` is equivalent to `(Result Error a -> msg)`,
but I don't really know how. Well, `Http.Error` and `Error` are the same thing.
It's just one is a qualified import and the other comes  from the http package
documentation, so it's not qualified in the type signature.

I think what's going on with `(Result Error a -> msg)` is that it's more like
`((Result Error a) -> msg)`, where `msg` is `NewGif`. That makes sense: the result
of the request is a `Result` union type with a left and right value (`Error` and `a`)
and that's passed to a function (`NewGif`) that returns a `msg`.

A `Result` is a function being called with two arguments: `Http.Error` and `String`.
The result of that is passed to `NewGif`

Example:

```elm
type Msg 
    = NewGif (Result Http.Error String)

-- ...

getRandomGif : String -> Cmd Msg
getRandomGif =
  let url = 
      "https://foo.com"

      request =
          Http.get url decodeGifUrl
  in
    Http.send NewGif request
```


### Miscellaneous

`Html Msg` means that messages are wrapped in the Html type. It's hard for me to 
imagine the implementation. `Html` itself is data. So it could be a JSON-ish object
with a specific interface. Then nested within that object is one or more objects 
with a Msg interface. And the Elm runtime takes care of the side-effects. So,
you're not actually sending anything anywhere. It's not like a listen or push thing.
The Elm runtime is doing the work of carrying the values between the top-level functions.

### Questions

_How does the pattern matching work with `NewGif (Ok newUrl) `_

`NewGif` has this type signature:

```elm
NewGif (Result Http.Error String)
```

```elm
type Result error value 
    = Ok value 
    | Err error
```

and is pattern matched like this:

```elm
NewGif (Ok newUrl) ->
  -- handle the right side...

NewGif (Err _) ->
  -- handle the left side...
```

`Ok` and `Err` are both subtypes of `Result`. Each take one argument. `Ok` holds
the result of a success and `Err` holds the result of a failure. The `Result`
constructor takes two arguments. The left argument is the err value and the right
argument is the successful value.

It seems the `(TypeA ( TypeB a ))` syntax allows you to destructure nested types.

_Given `Foo (Result String String)`, is `Result` called implicitly whenever you 
call `Foo`?_

No, it's not called implicitly. `Foo (Result String String)` says that it either 
must be `Foo (Ok "string")` or `Foo (Err "string")`. The value of the left and
right side are both strings.

_How does it know whether `Result` is an `Err` or an `Ok`?_


## Types

Tips for types:

- Type annotations help  you to think clearly about the code you're writing.
- Start with a type alias and then write functions.
    - You'll know exactly what data you're working with.
    - When you add to the data, the compiler will tell you every place that
      needs to be updated.
- Solve each subproblem first. 
- Use union types to put together all of the solutions.

```elm
type Foo a = Bar | Baz (List a)
```

This means that `Baz` always holds a `List` of any type. 

The parentheses are just meant to disambiguate. 

```elm
type Foo a = Bar | Baz List a
```

Means that the `Baz` constructor takes two arguments, a `List` and an `a`.


```elm
type Foo a = Bar | Baz (List a)
```

Means that the `Baz` constructor takes one argument, a `List a`.

## Union Types

```elm
type Foo a = Bar | Baz a
```

You cannot call `Foo` directly. You must call either `Bar` or `Baz`.


## Error handling and Tasks

> Elm treats errors as data.

> The point of `Result` is to make the possibility of failure clear and make sure
> it is handled appropriately.

### Maybe


```elm
type Maybe a 
  = Nothing 
  | Just a 
```

## Further reading

- [elm-guide: Union type exercises](http://elm-lang.org/examples/binary-tree)
