# 21 October 2017

## elm-guide random number example

[elm-guide](https://guide.elm-lang.org/architecture/effects/random.html)

### Structure of an elm program

**init**

```elm
init : ( Model, Cmd Msg )
```

A function that returns the initial value of the model.

**update**

```elm
update : Msg -> Model -> ( Model, Cmd Msg )
```
A function that updates the model. Returns a tuple containing a `Model` and a `Cmd Msg`.

**subscriptions**

```elm
subscriptions : Model -> Sub Msg
```
So I'm guessing that `Sub Msg` is a `Msg` that is emitted when the subscription
listener is called. I haven't reached the point where `subscriptions` are described.


### Questions

_How is it possible to call a type alias as a function?_

> When you create a type alias specifically for a record, it also generates a 
> record constructor. 

&mdash; [elm-guide](https://guide.elm-lang.org/types/type_aliases.html)

_What if a type alias is not a record? Can you still call it as a function? Or
do all type aliases have to be records?_

> When you create a type alias specifically for a record, it also generates a 
> record constructor. 

&mdash; [elm-guide](https://guide.elm-lang.org/types/type_aliases.html)

_When you call a type alias as a function, do the order of the arguments correspond
to the order of the record field declrations?_

> The arguments are in the order they appear in the type alias declaration...

&mdash; [elm-guide](https://guide.elm-lang.org/types/type_aliases.html)

_Where is the elm documentation?_

The best elm documentation is found in the 
[elm package documentation](http://package.elm-lang.org/).
This includes the language itself, which is documented in 
[elm-lang/core](http://package.elm-lang.org/packages/elm-lang/core/latest).

_What does `Random.generate` do?_

> A generator is like a recipe for generating certain random values. So a 
> `Generator Int` describes how to generate random integers.

```
generate : (a -> msg) -> Generator a -> Cmd msg
```

So `Random.generate` takes two arguments:

- `(a -> msg)`: A function which takes any value and returns a message.
- `Generator a`: a `Generator` which produces that value `a`.

and returns a `Cmd msg`, presumably by calling `(a -> msg)`.

&mdash; [elm-package: elm-lang/core Random.generate](http://package.elm-lang.org/packages/elm-lang/core/5.1.1/Random#Generator)

_Why do you have to pass the message to `Random.generate`? What happens if you
were to go `onClick NewFace (Random.int 1 6)`?_

`Random.int 1 6` doesn't actually return the random integer. It returns a `Generator`
that is capable of producing that random integer based on the parameters provided.

That's why you need `Random.generate` to actually get the random integer from the
generator.

_Are `Sub` and `Cmd` global values? Where are those defined? Are they part of the
language?_

These appear to be global. They're part of the `Platform` module, according to the
documentation.
