# 4 December 2017

Annotation layer:
The annotation problem is a set of four subproblems: 
  - User interface
  - Hosting
  - Registry
  - Social norms
  - The user interface
  - Hosting annotations
  - Registering an annotation
  - Social structures for
client, hosting, registry,
and social structure(s).
Of these three

- Client: enables you to read and create annotations
- Hosting: the annotations are stored on a P2P network
- Registry: append-only log that associates annotations with a Dat address.
    - Annotations can annotate other annotations.

**Questions**

- What about moderation?
  - Use a cryptocurrency to deter spam
- How does one create a registry that everyone can write to?
  - Use a blockchain as the registry
  - Would it be possible to do something like this on Dat?
  - Discoverability is hard

I would guess that browsers have not bothered to add a native annotation interface
because there is no canonical source for annotations.
They'd either have to implement their own annotation hosting service or they 
would have just be building a client to a third-party service.
The latter case can be achieved just as easily by the third-party itself using a 
browser extension.

**Further reading**

- [Stackoverflow: Peer to Peer: Methods of Finding Peers](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/310607/peer-to-peer-methods-of-finding-peers)


## _Secure ledgers don't require proof-of-work_ by Paul Frazee

[Secure ledgers don't require proof-of-work](http://pfrazee.github.io/blog/secure-ledgers-dont-require-proof-of-work)
[Hacker News: Secure ledgers don't require proof-of-work](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=15644545)

- A blockchains is a database that is shared by a network of computers.
- The computers on the network don't trust each other.
- A blockchain is designed so that the database is trustworthy even though the
  computers writing to the database are not trustworthy.
- Proof-of-work is a mechanism that helps to prevent fraudulent transactions.
- Proof-of-work requires the computer that will write to the database to complete a 
  large amount of useless computation.
- Computation requires electricity.
- Electricity is expensive.
- Proof-of-work is expensive.
- Miners are incentivized to spend electricity in proportion to the price of the
  coin they are mining.
- The amount of electricity used will rise with the price of Bitcoin.
- A blockchain is a linked list data structure.
- Each item in the list references the previous item using a cryptographic hash
  of that item.
- The hash encompasses the entire history of the blockchain. If you change a transaction
  somewhere in the middle of the chain, all of the hashes for all of the blocks
  following that transaction are invalidated.
- For that reason, it is trivial to compare two copies of the blockchain for equality.
  You just have to compare the first hash.
- By requiring a computer to solve a nontrivial computational problem before adding
- a transaction to the blockchain means that only one computer can do this at a time.
- Proof-of-work and blochchains are two different things.
- The blockchain is the datastructure that is being shared on the network. It
  serves as a record of transactions which are really just network events.
- Proof-of-work is an implementation detail of the network. It's the way that
  the network prevents fraudulent transactions.
- Frazee proposes a different model:
- Hosting of the blockchain is centralized.
- The host maintains a secure ledger which contains the host state and its activity
  log, including all requests and their results.
- The host publishes the ledger.
- The host publishes the code that represents the business logic.
- The clients can independently verify that the host is following the business
  rules by replaying the inputs agains the published code.
- This architecture makes it hard for the host to commit fraud without requiring
  an expensive proof-of-work mechanism.

> PoW is for decentralizing the ability to choose between competing valid blockchains.

- The client will choose the blockchain with more PoW because it knows that this
  blockchain is more trusted by the network.
