# 20 October 2017

## Backing up computer with rsnapshot 

Installed rsnapshot with apt.

There were a few things that were confusing to me. For example, it was surprisingly
hard to find a straightforward explanation of how to create a backup. The manpage
seems to focus mostly on the configuration file.

To create a backup, you run this:

```
rsnapshot [interval]
```

where `[interval]` is an alias like `alpha`.

### Intervals

Intervals have aliases like `alpha`, `beta`, etc. 

The configuration looks like this:

```
interval  alpha 6
```

`alpha` itself is just an alias or a nickname. You using it when running rsnapshot:
`rsnapshot alpha`. `6` is the maximum number of snapshots of this type to keep
at one time.

The result of this configuration is that you get a snapshot where the filename 
includes `alpha` and a number 1 - 6. This is useful because you want to backup
at different intervals simultaneously. And you don't want one interval of backups
to overwrite another interval. It's a way of saying, for this type `alpha`, I 
want a maximum of 6. But maybe for another type `beta`, I want a maximum of 3.
Then you can configure the cronjob to run `rsnapshot alpha` everyday and `rsnapshot beta`
every hour.

### Next steps

- Once a backup is created, send that backup to Digital Ocean Spaces.

### Questions

- What is the correct way to manage permissions? Do I run the cronjob as root? Or
  do I run the cronjob as my user with sudo?
- How do permission effect backups? What if I lose everything, have to completely
  reinstall my OS, wipe my harddrive, completely buy a new computer, etc. Can I
  still backup from these rsnapshot backups?

### Further reading

- [rsnapshot](http://rsnapshot.org/)
- [rsnapshot HOWTO](http://rsnapshot.org/rsnapshot/docs/docbook/rest.html)
- [An Introduction to DigitalOcean Spaces](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/an-introduction-to-digitalocean-spaces)
