# 28 October 2017

## Context-free Grammar

A context-free grammar (CFG) is a set of recursive rewriting rules used to generate a
pattern of strings.

Components of a CFG

- terminal symbols: characters of the alphabet that appear in the strings generated
  by the grammar.
- nonterminal symbols: placeholders for patterns of terminal symbols. These
  patterns can be generated by the nonterminal symbols.
- productions: rules for replacing or rewriting nonterminal symbols with other
  nonterminal symbols or terminal symbols.
- start symbol: a special nonterminal symbol that appears in the initial string
  generated by the grammar.

Generating a string from a CFG:

- Begin with a string consisting of a start symbol.
- Apply one of the productions with the start symbol on the left hand side,
  replacing the start symbol with the right hand side of the production.
- Repeat the process of selecting nonterminal symbols in the string, and replacing
  them with the right side of a corresponding production, until all nonterminals
  have been replaced by terminal symbols.

### Miscellaneous

- Keywords for built-in terminal symbols, e.g. `@alpha`, `@numeric`, `@alphanumeric`
- Operator that allows you to include all symbols except a list: `@not`.

### Further reading

- [Context-Free Grammars](https://www.cs.rochester.edu/%7Enelson/courses/csc_173/grammars/cfg.html)



```
$ start
:: empty
-> rewrite arrow

person -> ::
person -> Freddy Kane
person -> Switcherooo
person -> Best Rage

object -> Crystal
object -> Cactus
object -> Star

$ -> [person] owned a [object]
```
