# 7 December 2017

## Wacom and Krita setup

[Change Wacom pen movement speed](https://askubuntu.com/questions/572267/how-to-change-pen-movement-speed-on-wacom-tablet) 
to 1.5. Have to do this for both the tablet and the stylus.

`Settings > Configure Krita > Tablet Settings` change pressure settings.

1600 x 1200 at 300dpi. 8px brush size.

## Introduction to hierarchical state machines

[Introduction to Hierarchical State Machines](https://barrgroup.com/Embedded-Systems/How-To/Introduction-Hierarchical-State-Machines)
[Infinitely Better UIs with Finite Automata](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VU1NKX6Qkxc)
[Hacker News: Rage Against the Finite-State Machines](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=11411402)

The complexity of a traditional state machine grows to an intolerable level
quickly due to "state explosion".
State explosion is caused by the repitition of the same transition for different
events.
The traditional state machine has no concept of "identical" states.
Repeats the same transitions for different states.

"Ultimate Hook" pattern

- GUI system dispatches every event to the application first.
- The application is low in the hiearchary because it reacts to the event first.
- If not handled by the application, the event flows back to the system.
- The GUI system is higher in the hierarchy. It reacts only to events that are
  not handled by the application.
- The application only needs to code the behaviors that are different from the 
  standard behavior defined by the system.

In a hiearchical finite state machine, there is the "superstate" and 
the "substate".
A system in the substate is implicitly in the superstate.
So the system in the substate really only needs to extend the behavior of 
the superstate systems.
This is not just two levels deep, but is applied recursively to an arbitrary number
of nested state systems.

State nesting introduces behavioral inheritance.

>Behavioral inheritance lets you define a new state as a specific kind of another
>state, by specifying only the differences from the existing state rather than
>defining the whole new state from scratch.

Class inheritance allows subclasses to adapt to new environments.

Every state in a UML statechart can have optional entry actions.
Entry action is executed on entry to a state.
Every state can also have optional exit actions that are executed when the state
is exited.
Does not matter how the state is entered/exited - the entry/exit actions will be
executed.


[Statecharts](http://www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/~harel/papers/Statecharts.pdf)

> A reactive system, in contrast with a _transformational system_, is characterized
> by being, to a large extent, event-driven, continuously having to react to
> external and internal stimuli.

> The problem is rooted in the difficulty of describing reactive behavior in ways
> that are clear and realistic, and at the same time formal and rigorous, 
> sufficiently amenable to detailed computerized simulation.

> The behavior of a reactive system is really the set of allowed sequences of 
> input and output events, conditions, and actions, perhaps with some additional
> information such as timing constraints.

> "when event `a` occurs in state `A`, if condition `C` is true at the time, the
> system transfers to state `B`"

> State diagrams are simply directed graphs, with nodes denoting states, and arrows
> (labelled with the triggering events and guarding conditions) denoting 
> transitions.

This basic state-machine design is too naive for complex states because it
requires those states to be represented in a flat, unstratied fashion.

> To be useful, a state/event approach must be modular, hiearchical, and
> well-structured. It must also solve the exponential blow-up problem by relaxing
> the requirement that all combinations of states are represented explicitly.

The statecharts patterns satisfies the above requirements with a few concepts:

- Superstate: clustering related states into a set called a superstate.
- General transitions: not as specific as an arrow for each event.
- State refinements
