# 27 October 2017

## Elm questions

### _How to organize code in a non-trivial application: where do the decoders go?_


This is how Richard Feldman structures `rtfeldman/elm-spa-example`:

```
Data/
Page/
Request/
Views/
Main.elm
Ports.elm
Route.elm
Util.elm
```

**`Page.*`**: logic specific to pages of the application. e.g., `Page.Home`,
`Page.Articles`, `Page.Article.Editor`. Pages dependent on remote data expose an
`init` function that returns a `Task` responsible for loading the data.

**`Views.*`**: logic that is used by more than one `Page.*` module. `Views.Page`
exposes a `frame` function that wraps each page in a header and footer.

**`Data.*`**: describe domain-specific data structures. Expose functions for
transforming those data structures, including decoders that serialize/deserialize.
Identifiers like `id` and `slug` are described as union types, e.g. `ArticleSlug String`
or `UserId Int`.

**`Request.*`**: Expose functions to make API requests to the server. API endpoint
strings are only used in these modules.

**`Route.elm`**: All of the routing logic.

**`Ports.elm`** All of the ports logic.

**`Util.elm`** (or `Misc.elm`) holds various utility functions.

#### Further Reading

- [`rtfeldman/elm-spa-example`](https://github.com/rtfeldman/elm-spa-example)
- [Tour of an Open-Source Elm SPA](https://dev.to/rtfeldman/tour-of-an-open-source-elm-spa)


### _Are the functions exposed by the Elm JavaScript object documented anywhere?_

I've been able to find bits of documentation in various places.

- [Elm Guide: `Elm.[module name].fullscreen`](https://guide.elm-lang.org/interop/javascript.html#step-1-embed-in-html#ports)
- [Elm Guide: `Elm.[module name].embed`](https://guide.elm-lang.org/interop/javascript.html#step-1-embed-in-html)
- [elm-lang/core documentation: `Elm.[module name].worker`](http://package.elm-lang.org/packages/elm-lang/core/5.1.1/Platform)

Apparently these are the only three methods and at the time of writing, they are
not documented anywhere.

### _Is there a better way to debug JSON decoding than logging the error in the
update function?_

### _What is the Elm strategy for debugging?_

## Missing documentation examples

- The methods exposed by a compiled elm program. 
- `elm-package.json` fields

## Syntax sketches for a procedural text generation language

stak (::) a language for describing procedural text generators.

**Goals/Values**

- Text is easy to edit. 
- Text is not trapped in a noisy syntax.
- Syntax provides a simple way to compose these text fragments.
- As little syntax as possible.

**Language features**

- Stack
- Single line text
- Multi-line text
- Line comment
- Block comment
- Parameterization (maybe)

**Miscellaneous**

- A stack is a set of texts grouped by a name that evaluates to one of the set.
- Stacks contain single or multi-line text.
- Multi-line text must use the multi-line text syntax.
- Stacks can compose text and other stacks.
- (?) Stacks can be parameterized.
- Blocks are a list of text. Each item in the list is separated by a line break. 
  Multi-line fragments use a special syntax.
- Is there a way to resolve or represent cyclic dependencies?
- I had this idea where you could set dependency scopes, and any Fragment can
  compose a Fragment from an outer scope. Is this too hard to maintain?
- Does the level/row concept generate too much cognitive overhead?

**Syntax sketch**

```
-- name
Friendly Skull 
Pipes
Donovan Roundness
--

-- enemy
Freezy Guy
Brick Bones
Wall King
--

-- thing
spell
crystal keychain
wool slippers
--

--- start
[name] carried a [thing]
[name] sold a [thing]
[name] wished to own a [thing]
---

--- middle
[enemy] stole that thing from [name]
[enemy] had given that thing to [name]
[enemy] wanted that thing but [name] wouldn't give it away
--- 

--- end
[name] destroyed [enemy]
[name] is no longer friends with [enemy]
[name] and [enemy] will never get along
--- 

---- story
"""
My story is about [name] and [enemy]. 

First, [start].

Then, [middle].

So, [end].
"""
----
```

Alternative stacking syntax.

```
-- name
Friendly Skull 
Pipes
Donovan Roundness
--

-- thing
spell
crystal keychain
wool slippers
--

--- start
[name] wished to own a [thing]
{name} wished to own a {thing}
%name wished to own a %thing
$name wished to own a $thing
::name:: wished to own a ::thing::
::name wished to own a ::thing
---

```

**Other syntax ideas**

```
-- A line comment
---
A block comment
---
```

```
my list
  text fragment one
  text fragment two
  text fragment three
```

```
A ::foo:: walked down the road.
```

```
-- The baz generator takes some parameters

baz x y =>

Here are some parameters ::a:: and ::b::.
```

```
$ lang file.l baz --a 'A' --b 'B'
'Here are some parameters A and B.'
```
