# 25 October 2017

## Serving a static site from Amazon S3 and Cloudflare

I am using Amazon S3 to host [maxhallinan.com](https://maxhallinan.com).

Steps I took to set this up:

- Install Python 3 via pyenv.
- Install [s3cmd](https://github.com/s3tools/s3cmd) version 2.0.
  - Clone the repo to `~/.s3cmd`.
  - `cd` into the repo.
  - Set the local python version to Python 3+.
  - Run `python setup.py install`.
- `cd` into local site directory.
- Generate an AWS access key.
- Configure `s3cmd` by running `s3cmd --configure -c ./.s3cmd`.
- Create an amazon bucket called `site.domain`.
- Set permissions for bucket to public.
- From AWS S3 console: Click bucket name > Click properties > Click static site hosting
- Build site files.
- Use `s3cmd` to push site files to S3. Make sure correct S3 object metadata is set.
  - [Gist: Example s3cmd deployment script](https://gist.github.com/dpfranklin/5470776)
- Create a SSL certificate using the AWS Certificate Manager if a cert doesn't already exist.
- Create a Cloudflare distribution.
  - Set origin domain name to bucket name.
  - View Protocol Polic > Redirect Http to Https.
  - Object Caching > Maximum TTL > 31536000
  - Object Caching > Maximum TTL > 31536000
  - Object Caching > Default TTL > 31536000
  - Compress Objects Automatically > Yes
  - Alternate Domain Names > [domain names for CNAME record]
  - Select SSL cert created with Certificate Manager
  - [The Ultimate Guide to Deploying Static Sites on AWS](https://stormpath.com/blog/ultimate-guide-deploying-static-site-aws)
- Set CNAME record to Cloudflare domain.

**Todo**

- Use Travis CI to build automatically.
  - Confused about how to install all the dependencies.
- Minify CSS and JavaScript.
- Version assets by appending hash to file name.
