# 26 October 2017

## JSON decoding with elm

I wrote a JSON decoder for a response body from `https://swapi.co/api/people`.

I didn't find JSON decoding for this response body to be too complicated.

Especially with `json-decode-pipeline`, it's a little bit labor intensive but 
not especially complicated.

Lessons

- Start by writing types (type alias or union type). This helped me to clarify
  the shape of the JSON.
- Break nested data into a separate type.

### Questions

_What's the difference between an Elm `Dict` and an Elm `Record`?_

A `Dict` and a `Record` are two different data structures. `Record`s are supported
by a lot of syntax sugar, including a `Record` literal syntax. There is no literal
syntax for a `Dict`. The `Dict` module offers more powerful utility functions
for transforming a `Dict`. They are similar in the sense that values are "labeled"
by keys.

**Records**

> organize related data in a way that is easy to access and update.

&mdash;[Elm Docs: Records](http://elm-lang.org/docs/records)

- Keys are strings.
- "A lightweight labeled data structure".
- Cannot ask for a field that doesn't exist.
- Can change the value of a field but cannot add fields.
- No field will ever be `null` or `undefined`.
- Can pattern match on records: `add { x, y } = x + y`.
    - Destructuring works in function parameters, let expressions, 
      and case expressions.
- The language provides special accessor functions `r.foo` can be written also 
  as `.foo r`.
- Can create record constructors by creating a type alias for the record. 

**Dicts**

- Keys can be any type of comparable value:
  - `Float`, `Time`, `Char`, `String`, and tuples or lists of comparable types
- 

_Are `Record` keys enumerable?_

The short answer is no.

**Further reading**

- [Stack Overflow: Iterating through record fields](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/44831997/iterating-through-record-fields/44848026#44848026)


_How do you update a nested `Record`?_

> Your last example with the let/in syntax is as concise as is possible in Elm 
> 0.18 without resorting to additional packages.

This is not valid:

```elm
foo = { foo | bar = foo.bar }
```

Instead, use a `let/in` expression to store references to the values.

```elm
type alias Author = 
    { name : String
    }

type alias Article = 
    { author : Author
    }

type alias Model = 
    { article : Article
    }

update : Msg -> Model -> (Model, Cmd msg)
update msg model =
    case msg of 
      UpdateName name ->
          let 
            article = model.article
            author = article.author
            nextAuthor = { author | name = name }
            nextArticle = { article | author = nextAuthor }
          in
              ( { model | article = nextArticle }, Cmd.none )
```

The alternative is to use lenses.

**Further reading**

- [arturopala/elm-monocle](http://package.elm-lang.org/packages/arturopala/elm-monocle/1.4.0/Monocle-Lens)
- [Concise way of updating a nested value inside a record in Elm (0.18)](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/42118128/concise-way-of-updating-a-nested-value-inside-a-record-in-elm-0-18?rq=1)
- [Github: elm-lang/elm-compiler Issue #984](https://github.com/elm-lang/elm-compiler/issues/984)

_How to organize code in a non-trivial application: where do the decoders go?_


_Is there a better way to debug JSON decoding than logging the error in the 
update function?_

_What is the Elm strategy for debugging?_
