# 25 November 2017

## "The Annotation Problem" notes

[hypothes.is](https://web.hypothes.is/)

>The Hypothesis Project is a new effort to implement an old idea: A conversation 
>layer over the entire web that works everywhere, without needing implementation
>by any underlying site.

Based on the Web Annotation standard.

- Select text.
- Add tags to an annotation.
- Reply to an annotation.
- Create public or private annotations.
- Share the annotation.


## Thoughts on annotations

The idea of an annotation is to locate the conversation about a piece of content
at the site of that content.
This commonly takes the form of comments.
Annotations are slightly more integrated and more granular than comments because
the comments can be associated with a line or a word, a location within the content,
rather than with the content as a whole.

A second use for annotations is to collect bits of content.
"Annotating", in this case is really about highlighting.
Rather than copy/pasting into a text document, you can simply use the interace
to isolate a fragment of content.
Then those fragments are easier to work with in isolation, search through, tag, etc.

Why did comments take off and the idea of annotations did not?

I'm not sure that an annotation layer will be clearly beneficial in the way that
Dan Whaley says it will be.
Dan Whaley claims that we need a system which will enable collective reasoning.
The outcome of collective reasoning, that is people thinking something through
together, is superior in quality to the outcome of an individual reasoning
about a problem in isolation.
Wikipedia might demonstrate this, those it's hard to quantify "quality".
Not everyone is happy with Wikipedia.
But overall, it's a very useful resource and it's usefulness has a lot to do
with its crowd-sourced, collaborative, collective means of content generation.
But you need scale and diversity to achieve this quality.
With a smaller and less diverse set of number people, the same system creates
an echo chamber. 
This effect can be seen on Twitter, 4chan, Reddit, and other places online where
people have conversations.
People tend to group themselves with other likeminded individuals.
Annotations could be expected to evidence the same collective bias.

At any rate, I think it's clearest benefits are more modest and still worth 
pursuing. 
For example, notifying an author of a typo or some other factual inaccuracy requires
a channel of communciation, such as email or messaging, that is external to the 
site. 
An annotation would enable a reader to flag the author to this problem in a much
easier way.
Annotations would also be a way of bookmarking a piece of a webpage rather than
the whole webpage.

Finally, one could publish a webpage with annotations.
You often see authors rolling their own footnotes using anchor tags.

So while the inevitability of cultural benefit of an annotation layer is less clear 
to me, the practical necessity is.
People are already trying to annotate the web but the available options aren't
working very well.

### Problems

The annotation problem is really two problems: interface and hosting.

I think there are two main reasons that an annotation layer hasn't caught on:
First, the available interfaces are either hard to use and/or have too many features.
These interfaces are really platforms and not tools.
Second, all options for annotation involve a propietary annotation hosting service.
This makes it hard to interoperate.
If I want to share my hypothes.is annotation with someone else, they have to 
install the hypothes.is software.
If I want to see their non-hypothes.is annotation, I have to install some other
software.
So now annotations are living in multiple systems and I have to move back and forth
between these systems.
So it's too complicated.
For this reason, it's a feature which should be built into the network.
The problem with that annotations are essentially their own documents that
share a relationship with the underlying site.
But you don't want the site host to be responsible for hosting these other documents.
And you don't want some other, centralized service to be responsible for it either.
The network needs to be peer-to-peer and the annotation interface embedded in
the network should just be about publishing to the peer-to-peer network.
That might solve the hosting problem but there's a problem still remaining:
where does the relationship live?
You load a page and your browser needs to be able to find all the annotations for
that page.
You don't want the site's host to own this information.
And again, you want to avoid a centralized service that hosts this information.
You have here essentially a DNS problem.
A registry that maps site hostnames to annotation location names (e.g. links).
You'd also need to have a way to map annotation names to annotation names. That
way people can "reply" to an annotation without needing to write to the annotation
itself.
The reply would take the form of a mapping from an annotation to another annoation.
This is where I'm not sure how it would work.

- Need a way to view annotations for a page.
  - Need an interface layer on top of the document.
  - Need that interface layer to know about the annotations associated with that document.
  - Need this interface to be consistent page to page.
- Need a place to store annotations.
  - This is one of the big problems.
  - Either you have to expect the site itself to host an annotation service
    or you depend on a third-party to host the annotation service.
  - In both cases, this is centralized.
  - The system is owned by a single person and doesn't scale well.
- Ideally each browser would provide a native annotation interface.
- The interface could be extended.
- Annotations would conform follow a standard format.
- Annotations would be hosted on a peer-to-peer network that does not rely on 
  centralized hosting.

## Decentralized registry

It's not DNS that's needed but a registry.
The client needs to first create the annotation by publishing it to the network
and then register its location.
The registry would have to be decentralized in terms of control but centralized
in terms of location.

## Interesting, random stuff

- [Common Garden](http://commongarden.org/)
- [Github: Common Garden](https://github.com/CommonGarden)
