# 27 November 2017

## Difference between a regular and a context-free grammar

Regular grammar is left or right linear.

Context-free grammar is basically any combination of terminals and nonterminals.

Regular grammar is a subset of context-free grammar.

A regular language is recognized by a finite automata.

A context-free language requires a stack.

A context-sensitive language requires two stacks.

Regular vs. context-free is about constraints on the right side of the production
rule.
A regular grammar is more constrained than a context-free grammar.
A regular grammar is either left regular (or "left linear") or right regular 
(or "right linear"), folling this form:

Right linear:

```
A -> aB
A -> a
B -> b
```

or left linear

```
A -> Ba
A -> a
B -> b
```

A context-free grammar is not linear:

```
A -> ABaB
A -> a
B -> b
```

A grammar that intermixes left-regular and right-regular production rules is a
linear grammar.
This linear grammar is not regular.

Formal grammar describes patterns of characters in a language (e.g. words, sentences)
without describing their meaning.
These patterns are called production rules because they describe how to produce
a valid string or a substring of a valid string.
Context-free because in order to replace any given nonterminal with a terminal, 
we do not need to keep track of what symbols came before or come after that nonterminal.

**Further reading**

- [Stack Overflow: Regular vs. Context-free Grammars](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/559763/regular-vs-context-free-grammars)
- [Stack Overflow: what is the difference between context free grammar and an Other grammer?](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/20854634/what-is-the-difference-between-context-free-grammar-and-an-other-grammer)


## Dat basics

### CLI

Install Dat:

```shell
npm install -g dat
```

Create a Dat

```shell
mkdir TestDat
cd TestDat
dat create
```

Share a Dat

```shell
cd TestDat
dat share
```

### Node

[dat-node](https://www.npmjs.com/package/dat-node)


```javascript
import Dat from 'dat-node';

// this will initialize a new dat if one does not exist at the given path
// or it will resume a dat if it does exist at the given path.
Dat(`/path/to/dat/dir`, (err, dat) => {
  // import files at `path/to/dat/dir` into a dat archive
  // (or if it's already a dat archive)
  // the `watch` flag is `true` so it watches for changes
  // and broadcasts those changes to the network.
  const importer = dat.importFiles({ watch: true, });

  // share the files on the network
  dat.joinNetwork();

  // print the dat address
  console.log(dat.hex.toString(`hex`));
});
```
