# 19 October 2017

## Elm modules

### Declaring a module

```elm
module Foo exposing (..)
```

Defines a name for the module.

`exposing` means what can be imported from that module by another module.

Explicitly exposed values are preferred to `..`.

The Elm compiler adds `module Main exposing (..)` if there is a file with no
module declaration.


### Filepaths

```elm
-- /Foo/Bar/Baz.elm
module Foo exposing (..)
```

```elm
-- /Main.elm
import Foo.Bar.Baz
```

Module names match file paths.


### Using a module

```elm
import Foo
```

Does not require a file path to the module. The module is imported by the name
it was declared with.

```elm
import Foo as F
```

Use `as` to alias a module.


### Building modules

Make sure that the directory or directories where the modules are located are listed
in the `"source-directories"` field of elm-package.json. The compiler will look
for a package in all of the listed source directories and in the `elm-stuff`
directory where the elm packages are located.


### Links

- [Elm Guide: Modules](https://guide.elm-lang.org/reuse/modules.html)


## What is special about Main.elm?

Main.elm is the entry-point of an application only by convention.

> Any module that binds main to a value of type Program Never can be an entry 
> point to an Elm program.

### Links

- [Elm Community FAQ: "Does the main module file have to be named “Main.elm”?](http://faq.elm-community.org/#does-the-main-module-file-have-to-be-named-mainelm)


## Tips from Elm Guide

Start with the model.


## Irritating bits from the documentation

I find the Elm documentation is often condescending.

> Also, we need to learn more before we start talking to servers, so before you 
> try that here, keep reading until HTTP is introduced. It will be significantly 
> easier with proper guidance!

[Source](https://guide.elm-lang.org/architecture/user_input/forms.html)


> Honestly, it is best to just read that guide from front to back instead of 
> muddling around and reading it piecemeal.

[Source](http://package.elm-lang.org/packages/elm-lang/html/2.0.0/Html#beginnerProgram)


## Elm effects

Command (`Cmd`): how to create a side-effect.

Subscription (`Sub`): how to react to a side-effect.
