# 30 December 2017

## git-status-edit

I often learn more than I expect about shell programming when I solve seemingly 
small shell programming tasks.
There seems to be two reasons for this.
The first, and perhaps biggest, reason is that I am a beginner.
There's a lot of discovery compressed into the first experience of something 
new.
But I don't always feel like I discover this much this fast when I am learning a
new programming language.
It's not that I am learning at a different speed but that there's more that's
interesting packed into the same surface area.
The second reason speaks to the nature of Unix shell programming.
Shell programming commonly involves self-assembling the tools needed to 
complete the task.
Especially as a beginner, this exposes you to a broad range of tools and 
concepts that can be widely used behind the task at hand.

Recently I wrote a small script that opens all of the files logged by 
git-status in Vim.
I like to review changes before I commit them.
While this can be done interactively with `git add -p`, sometimes I find the
interface overly complicated.
Here is the script:

```bash
vim $(git status --porcelian | awk '/^(|.)[^DRC]/ {print $2}')
```

In writing about this script, I learned about a surprising number of things: 

- git-status `--porcelain` option
- `rev`
- `cut`
- The difference between single and double quotes in bash.
- The pipe operator.
- AWK programming language which I'd never heard of before.
- Regex


## First iteration

First I wanted to get a list of file names from the `git-status` output.
The output of `git status` is pretty verbose.

Use `git status --porcelain` to get machine-readable output. 
This is easier to edit than `git status`.

The output looks like this:

```
M foo.txt
```

Piped to `cut -d ' ' -f 2`. My intention was to delimit by space and take the 
second field.

The problem was that `git-status` sometimes pads lines with whitespace. 
In that case there were three fields. 
`cut` does not have a concept of the last field.
Instead, I reversed the line first, cut the first field, then reversed again:

```shell
git status --porcelain | rev | cut -d ' ' -f 1 | rev
```

Then I can do this to open it in Vim:

```shell
vim $(git status --porcelain | rev | cut -d ' ' -f 1 | rev)
```
### `rev` and `cut` 

**`rev`**

Reverses the characters in each line of the text input.

**`cut`**

```
cut OPTION... [FILE]...
```

Removes (or "cuts") sections from each line of `[FILE]` and sends to standard
output.

Each line has one or more "fields" that are separated by a field delimiter. 

The default field delimiter is a tab.

Use the `-d, --delimiter` argument to specify a non-default delimiter.

Select one or more fields using the `-f, --fields` argument. `-f, --fields` 
takes a list of integers.

### Synax

`$()`: is command substitution. 
The command(s) within the parens are executed 
and then replaced by their standard output. 
Can also use backticks. 
Both invoke a subshell.
But backticks cannot be nested.

`' '`: preserves the literal value of any/all characters. 
Double quotes retain special meaning for some characters. 
I could have used either single or double here.


## Second iteration

Then I noticed that I already had this script but implemented in a different
way:

```shell
vim $(git status --porcelain | awk '{print $2}')
```

`awk` is an interpreter for the AWK Programming Language. 
`'{print $2}'` is an AWK program.
AWK programs have this structure: `pattern {action}`.
In this program, there is no `pattern`, only `{action}`.
When `pattern` is omitted, everything is a match.
Single quotes are used to avoid shell expansion.
`print` is a built-in AWK function.
`$2` is the second argument.

## Next steps

I wrote a regex that says as long as the first or second character is not `D`,
`C`, `R`, or `U`.
This regex works for `grep` but not for `awk`.

```bash
echo 'MD /foo' | grep -E '^(|.)[^DRCU]'
MD /foo
echo ' D /foo' | grep -E '^(|.)[^DRCU]'
 D /foo
```

An alternate pattern would be a regex that matches if it's double `DD`, because
maybe I want to open the files if it's `MD` or something. 
The patterns I think I want to match are `DD`, ` D`, `D `.
