# 20 November 2017

## The annotation problem

Annotations are an unsolved problem.

The domain is very broad.

Annotations are essentially about creating a hierarchical relationship between 
a piece of text and one or more other piece of text.

What's the difference between modeling the act of annotating and the annotation
artifact?
The W3C web annotation standard attempts to model the artifact. 
Modeling the artifact is difficult in such a broad and messy domain.
The artifact is difficult to model because annotations are often ad-hoc.
You can try to force people to conform to your model. 
Modeling the artifact requires defining a set of semantics that will cover everything.
This is one thing that is so awkward about the W3C Web Annotation spec - the
semantics are terribly awkward. They're an attempt to be general enough to cover
everything without losing real meaning.
The advantage of defining semantics like this is that the shape and meaning of
the data can travel across systems.
As with HTML5, the attempt to enrich the semantic range leads to ambiguity and
confusion. When to use an `Article` versus when to use a `Section`. Where can
a `Header` and a `Nav` go?

It's easier to model the act of annotating. 
The set of semantics is much smaller.
The act of annotating is taking one piece of text and relating it to one or more
other pieces of text.
The model doesn't have to encode any semantics beyond this hierarchical relationship.
The user can provide the semantics.
The disadvantage is that the annotation doesn't travel across systems.
You have to provide your own system to consume the annotation artifact.

I would like an annotation tool to be something like Markdown or RSS in its approach
to the problem:

Markdown addresses the problem: "HTML is unpleasant to write and obscures 
the document content."
Markdown works because it's easy to read and easy to write.
Markdown does not attempt to be a shorthand for all of HTML.
A Markdown document will compile to a string of HTML but cannot compile to a 
valid HTML document. 
Markdown addresses a small subset of HTML, the small subset that is frequently
handwritten on the fly.

RSS addresses the problem: "I want to know that my favorite sites have added new content
without checking each site individually". 
RSS also succeeds because it confines itself to a self-contained slice of the problem.
This problem has two parts: knowing about the update and receiving that knowledge.
RSS confines itself to only one part of that problem: knowing about the update.
It provides a standard way for a site to say what the latest content is, when 
it was published, and optionally to provide some slightly finer-grained metadata
about the content.
RSS does not provide a model for the content itself.
RSS simply requires you to provide a title, a link, and a date.
There is no modeling of content type (e.g. Image vs. Video vs. Article).
Likewise, RSS does not provide a platform for receiving the knowledge of the update.

The problem with annotations on the web is that:

- The standard format (W3C web annotations) is poorly adopted.
- Most annotation artifacts are tied to a platform.
- Each of these platforms has its own domain model.

Do annotations need to travel between systems?
The idea of web annotations is that the site can send the annotations to the browser
and the browser can provide a native interface for displaying these annotations.
Instead of using a browser extension or some other third-party platform, it happens
natively.
Problems are, how are the annotations moderated and who is permitted to create
an annotation?
You could also scrape the annotations for a site and use them that way.

### Prior art

[Hypothes.is: Historical Survey of Annotation Efforts](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/2f86L7vgHUW9wSLNNSunhjmtxtg6KlCOVpHGKbqUzW-Y/edit#gid=0)

#### org-mode

[org-mode](http://orgmode.org/), [Wikipedia: org-mode](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Org-mode)

> Simple outliner for note-taking and list management.

Uses plain text files written with org-mode markup.

Requires a text editor that can run in org-mode.

Originally built for and most prominently supported by emacs.

The system includes a lightweight markup language:

>allowing lines or sections of plain text to be hierarchically divided, tagged, 
>linked, and so on.

Example org-mode uses:

- Nested todo lists.
- Tagging todo items.
- Adding properties to todo items such as deadline and priority.
- Plain text outlines.
- Wiki-like organization uses multiple files and org-mode links.
- Add a .org file to a source code repository as a way of tracking bugs.

Supported by:

- Emacs (by default)
- Vim (with extension)
- Sublime Text (with extension)
- A handful of iOS and Android apps

Features

- Outlines
  - an org-mode enabled editor can fold outline sections.
  - based on outline.el.
- Planning
  - Headlines can be turned into tasks.
  - Can navigate through a document by going from one task to another.
  - Each todo item can be given metadata like schedule dates, deadline dates, 
    tags, and properties.
- Timetracking "clocking"
  - Use key bindings to record start and end dates.
- Agenda
  - A view onto the tasks, organized by schedule and deadline data.
- Todo items
  - Called "capturing".
  - Mark something as a task.
- Tables
  - Display and edit plain text tabular data.
- Export to markup formats like Html and Latex.
- Code
  - Embed executable code snippets into a .org document. 
 
So org-mode is very feature-ful.
