# 30 October 2017

## Grammar for a procedurally generated narrative

Here are is the grammar.

```
[person]
Friendly Skull
Pipes
Donovan Roundness
Vernerd
Weepy Weepy

[thing]
spell
comb
rolled pants
the last lightbulb
both wool slippers

[utility]
smashing concrete
spellchecking foggy thoughts
scalp scratching
smashing concrete
paying the price
finding electrocution risks

[place]
the begrudging office of [person]
[person]'s enviable reading chair

[start]
[person] lost [thing] for [utility] in [place].
```

Other ideas:

```
[things]
a spell for spellchecking foggy thoughts
a comb for scalp scratching
rolled pants revealing short socks
the last lightbulb smashed by concrete
wool slippers that were worth the price
a possible electrocution risk
```

Next steps:

- Write a program which generates the strings that this grammar can generate.
- Which language should I write this in?

Things that would be useful for a language for procedural generation of text:

- Pluralization
- Capitalization
- Correct article
- Correct pronoun
- Be able to wrap a nonterminal symbol in context. e.g., if '[person] is [person]'
  is the nonterminal, then I can say that in both cases `[person]` is `'foo'`.
  This would make it non-context free I believe.

## "So you want to build a generator"

[Kate Compton: So you want to build a generator](http://galaxykate0.tumblr.com/post/139774965871/so-you-want-to-build-a-generator)

First, define the thing you want to make (the artifact) by defining the "properties" and "constraints".

Properties are things that describe what you want the artifact to be like. 

Constraints are things that describe what you don't want the artifact to be like.

The more concrete, the better.

Second, define how a human would make the specified artifact.

Third, translate the human process to a computer process.

Generators often have the following capabilities:

- Encapsulate knowledge of options.
- Create structure.
- Encode conditional rules for options.
- Create variability in structure.
- Question constraints (e.g., "have x been solved?").

Types of generative methods:

- Distribution: artifact is generated by randomized placement of one or more values
  in an area of space or time. Example: placement of monsters in a video game screen.
- Parametric: artifact is generated by adjusting aspects of the base artifact. Example:
  adjusting the height of a building or the curve of a teapot.
- Tile-based: artifact is generated by combining orthogonal elements (tiles). The
  tiles themselves are predefined but their combination is generated. Example:
  the game board for Settlers of Catan.
- Grammars: grammars are a way of expressing a tree structure of options using symbols.
  A grammar works by replacing the symbol (the nonterminal) with it's right-side value,
  which is either another nonterminal symbol or a terminal symbol (an alphanumeric
  character). Grammars do not have a way to explicitly define constraints unless
  the constraint is implicit.
- Constraint solvers 
- Steering behaviors
- Genetic algorithms
- Cellular automata: many simple agents working in parallel.

Ways that generators fail:

- The constraints cannot be adequately defined.
- The artifact fails to be interesting.

One way that the artifact can fail to be interesting is that it can be a unique
generation but the uniqueness is insignificant or hard to perceive. 
"Perceptual differentiation" is the feeling that one artifact is not the same as
the last.

## Formal grammar

[Wikipedia: Formal grammar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Formal_grammar)

A formal grammar uses a formal language to describe a set of string production rules.

The production rules describe how to form strings that are valid according the 
language's syntax.

A grammar has two functions:

- produce language (strings);
- recognize strings that are grammatically correct or incorrect.

"Recognizers" are described by a separate set of formalisms called automata
theory.

A grammar consists of a set of rules for transforming strings.

- Begin with a start symbol.
- Production rules are applied in any order.
- Recursively replace nonterminal symbols with terminal symbols.

The "language formed by the grammar" is the set of all unique strings that can 
be generated via this process of rewriting nonterminal with terminal symbols.


### Questions

_If I were to write a generator for this grammar that generated all possible
outcomes of this string, wouldn't I have an infinite loop? `S -> aSb` would
expand infinitely._

```
S -> aSb
S -> ba
```

**Further reading**

- [How do I construct abstract syntax trees from a list of tokens using a context-free grammar?](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/31634461/how-do-i-construct-abstract-syntax-trees-from-a-list-of-tokens-using-a-context-f)
- [Stack Overflow: recursive descent parsers](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2245962/is-there-an-alternative-for-flex-bison-that-is-usable-on-8-bit-embedded-systems/2336769#2336769)


_What does a Kleene star do/mean?_

The Kleene star means that you can have any number of occurrences of a pattern.

`a*` matches `a` and `aa` and `aaa`, etc.

**Further reading**

- [Stack Overflow: Confusion about the Kleene Star](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/43353912/confusion-about-the-kleene-star)
