---
title: Monetizable Protocols
layout: post
permalink: monetizable-protocols
published: true
---

> With tokens, however, the creators of a protocol can “monetize” it directly and will in fact benefit more as others build businesses on top of that protocol.

--- Albert Wenger, ["Crypto Tokens and the Coming Age of Protocol"](http://continuations.com/post/148098927445/crypto-tokens-and-the-coming-age-of-protocol) 

Many network protocols are free to implement and free to use. These protocols (including TCP/IP and HTTP, foundational protocols of the world wide web) were developed by researchers and are maintained by nonprofit organizations. Both groups lack a profit motive and their non-proprietary protocols are not monetizable. All profits related to these protocols are generated by building software on top of the protocol, on the application layer.

Wenger describes a model of non-proprietary protocol that is monetizable. The protocol is monetized by building a cryptocurrency into the network and then charging a fee, paid in this currency, for network transactions. Because there is a finite number of tokens, demand for these tokens grows with the network and the value of a token grows with that demand. As with any cryptocurrency, protocol tokens can be traded on exchanges and converted to fiat currency.

Wenger offers [Filecoin](http://filecoin.io/) as one example of a monetized network protocol. The Filecoin network facilitates a form of decentralized cloud storage in which users rent storage space to other users. The rent is paid in Filecoin and Filecoin can be exchanged for other currencies. Filecoin departs from the Dropbox model of a centralized organization providing a cloud storage service. The centralized organization is replaced by the Filecoin protocol. The protocol orchestrates transactions between independent actors and incentivizes the essential forms of network participation.

Monetizable network protocols yield a few incentives that benefit the public interest. Monetizability incentivizes the creation of new protocols aligned with consumer demand. A protocol creator is likely to meet these demands because doing so leads to network adoption and network adoption grows the value of the protocol tokens. Monetizability also incentivizes maintenance and improvement of existing protocols. The appeal of a protocol grows as the protocol is perfected, again leading to wider network adoption and token value growth. Finally, monetizability incentivizes implementation of the protocol. Participation in the network provides the opportunity to earn tokens. The opportunity to profit leads to network adoption; network adoption leads to token value growth; token value growth leads to greater potential profit; greater potential profit leads to wider network adoption. The monetized network fuels and sustains its own growth, theoretically in the direction of common good.

How would a proliferation of these protocols impact the free exchange of information on the web? Historically, non-proprietary protocols have been "free and open". Anyone correctly implementing the protocol is able to connect to the network and send and receive bits. In the case of HTTP, this has been called a "freedom to publish". Given a connection to an HTTP network, anyone can send a hypertext document without cost or limit imposed by the protocol itself. But this freedom is not free. The cost of this freedom includes the prices of network infrastructure, computing hardware, and bandwidth. The free exchange of information, an implicit theme of many non-proprietary protocols, is as free as the cost of connecting to the network. This is not a trivial cost and for many people, this cost is prohibitively expensive.

Monetizable networks ensure a cost on top of the cost of a network connection. In the case of cloud storage, this is not a new or additional cost. Dropbox and other cloud storage companies are subscription services. Filecoin neither removes nor adds this cost, but perhaps improves on it's effect. Filecoin decentralizes not only the storage infrastructure and the storage service provider but also the wealth generated by that service. Because anyone with extra disk space and a connection to the Filecoin network is free to go into business as a storage provider, Filecoin can be understood as promoting accessibility and egalitarianism. 

But if monetizable network protocols become the dominant protocol model and network transactions typically incur a fee, will the exchange of information be less free overall?

Related reading:

- [App Coins and the dawn of the Decentralized Business Model](https://medium.com/the-coinbase-blog/app-coins-and-the-dawn-of-the-decentralized-business-model-8b8c951e734f) by Fred Ehrsam
- [Bitcoin as Protocol](https://www.usv.com/blog/bitcoin-as-protocol) by Albert Wenger
- [Bitcoin: Clarifying the Foundational Innovation of the Blockchain](http://continuations.com/post/105272022635/bitcoin-clarifying-the-foundational-innovation-of) by Albert Wenger
- [The Blockchain Application Stack](http://joel.mn/post/103546215249/the-blockchain-application-stack) by Joel Monegro